Well, good morning everyone. Thank you so much for joining us. Um We
have been doing this weekly. I think we are contemplating going back to a less um a
schedule that might be every other week and we will let you know about that.
Um which is good news, I think because it means that hopefully,
things are not quite as chaotic as they have been.
Um So our panelists today,
you've ha uh we've had the pleasure of having them on before.
Really glad to have them all back.
We've got Doctor Ruth Macdonald,
who's the vice president and associate chief Medical Officer at
Seattle Children's.
Um There's always been an interest in the impact on pediatric patients.
And I think also
uh we've been talking about the vaccines for 5 to 11. Um
I'm very personally interested in this topic,
so we're excited to hear more about that.
Uh Doctor Tim Deet,
the Chief Medical Officer at
Medicine,
uh Riza Khalil,
who is the chief executive of Cadillac Health System in uh the tricities. And
that is a part of the state that's been
particularly hit by COVID um throughout the pandemic really.
And finally, Doctor Andrea Carter,
who's the Chief medical Officer at Samaritan Healthcare and
Moses Lake also from a part of the state that's
um experienced more than its share of COVID. So really glad to have all of you.
So I'll start with some opening comments and then
I'll turn it over to our panelists for theirs.
So first, the hospitalization rates continue to decline but the decline
is slower.
Um Unfortunately,
it's good that they're declining and we wish they were declining faster.
So there are
1025 COVID positive patients in hospitals uh this morning compared to
1101 that we reported at the same time last week.
So it is a decline but we wish again, we wish it was more quick.
Um There is not much of a decline.
Actually, there's really no decline in patients who are on ventilators.
This week,
there are 100 and 84 patients on ventilators versus
100 and 85 that we reported last week.
That is a different,
it's not the same 185 people who are on ventilators because
what we know is that some people who are on ventilators,
um
some get better
and some die.
And so there is a change in the patient population.
We wish that there was,
this is a number we would really like to see going down faster because
once patients are on a ventilator there.
Um As you've heard in this briefing before,
um their chance of survival goes down pretty significantly.
So that's a number we would, we really would like to see go down
and we continue to have about 10 or 15 deaths per day.
That is also a decline, which is good news, but it's still a ton.
And I think I want to really emphasize that
this is a new thing COVID clearly in our lives.
If there was something else, I was thinking about this this morning, like,
what else would it be if someone,
if there was someone who was shooting 10 to 15 people a day or there was a car,
a kind of a car that malfunctioned that caused crashes that
killed the 1010 to 15 people a day in our state.
I
think the response from the public would be tremendous and
it feels we continue to feel in the hospital community like
people are just like there's more of a, a well,
um about these COVID deaths and they are tragic.
Every last one of them is tragic. Um
And a huge loss for the community,
for the family and we really want to do everything we can to prevent those.
And as, as we've said, many times,
vaccination is the number one way.
Um The social distancing remains a really big issue.
Um
There was uh some information from the Department of Health that they
shared with us last week showing
that people's social circles are becoming increasingly
like if you're vaccinated.
Your people are vaccinated, you know, your friends,
your family tend to all be vaccinated.
If you're unvaccinated, your people are largely unvaccinated. And so
the clusters of,
of risk for unvaccinated people grow even greater because they're spending
so much of their time around.
Other folks who are unvaccinated,
who are like more likely to get to transmit the disease to them.
So that's a
um
that's really worrisome um information.
Um Today is
Vaccine Day.
Um which means that by the end of the day, people have to have been vaccinated,
proven that they're vaccinated,
uh
or gotten an exemption and a accommodation or they can't work tomorrow.
And so,
uh leaders of hospitals and schools and uh
ems and long term care organizations today,
I would call that the
hr employee health people are probably in a huge
scramble today to try to get all this,
this finished.
Um We don't have new data about how many hospital employees are vaccinated.
We will resurvey our members um likely the week of the 25th, we may,
we're gonna consult with our members to see if they
would rather just wait till the first week of November.
Um But in the next couple of weeks, we will, we will resurvey.
There is some con you know, last week we reported that we had 88% staff vaccinated 12%
a combination of things.
Um either partially vaccinated,
had applied for an exemption and it hadn't yet been reviewed or approved, um,
or decided on
or they hadn't turned in their forms
and there has been some movement in that number
where people who were in that 12% have either
moved to partially vaccinated.
Some of the partially vaccinated folks have gotten their
second shot or may have completed their two weeks.
Um,
and then finally,
people who ha had been vaccinated a long time ago who hadn't
yet turned in their cards and so they're turning in their cards,
which is great.
Um So, so they're getting ve
uh verification. So there's been um I think a lot of activity at the end of last week
um over the weekend and probably till the end of today.
Um So tomorrow will be the first day that really impacts us.
Um
We do continue to have concerns for sure about
long term care and um the first responders,
the ambulance and fire,
um what we hear is that their vaccine rates
are potentially lower than the hospital vaccine rates.
And so that can, that
has the potential to be to create kind of a
cascading impact um across hospitals that patients can't get to the hospital or
can't be transported to a hospital where they need to move or um if
long term care can't accept patients who need to leave the hospital and
we've seen an increase in the those patients who are difficult to discharge.
So those are the things that were, that are on our mind today
and I think um Doctor Dillard, I'll start with you for the um you know,
what are you all seeing in the VAC, how's the vaccine?
Um
uh working at
medicine?
And what did you see over the last, the end of the week,
at the beginning in this weekend?
Great. No, thank you. Uh Cassie.
Um You know, and again, I just wanna emphasize,
we very much are in support of the
requirement that all healthcare workers be vaccinated.
We need to
maintain a safe environment for our patients and our staff.
At the same time, the last couple of weeks, coming up to the 18th, have been very uh
um anxiety ridden.
I think for our teams, a lot of work by our hr personnel, by our employee health teams.
Uh and we want everyone to be vaccinated.
We don't want to lose any of our valued workers. Although at the end of the day,
uh there are gonna be people who unfortunately
no longer will be with our organization.
Uh after today.
Uh We, when you look at our staff,
our medical staff and our trainees are at roughly 99% vaccinated.
So we're extremely happy with that
uh number at the same time, it means that we probably have about 220 staff
uh who won't be with us uh after today. And that's impactful.
It's impactful for them, it's impactful for their colleagues.
Uh And so again, it's something that, uh on one hand,
we're very pleased with our vaccination rates, but this is
a lot of work.
Uh And I don't think when the governor put in the proclamation,
perhaps we had anticipated
all of the logistical challenges of getting this implemented
uh by uh today.
And do you wanna, uh doctor,
do you wanna talk any about what you're seeing as far as cases and trends and, uh,
and death rates in within the UD medicine system?
Yeah, within our uh hospitals. Uh Today, we have, I believe, roughly uh 54 patients
uh across our four hospital campuses.
So as Cassie mentioned that has come down,
but it's kind of plateaued in that 50 to 60 range.
Uh and of those uh 23 are within the IC U.
So we still have many uh critically ill patients.
The overall mortality rate for someone being
admitted to our hospitals is around 21%.
Again, the majority of those within the IC U.
But that's one in five individuals with COVID-19 who are admitted to the hospital,
unfortunately die uh from that disease.
And so it is having that impact, I think as Cassie mentioned,
we were 21 months into this pandemic. I think there's
almost a numbness
or an unfortunate tolerance uh
to seeing these numbers every day.
Whereas early in the pandemic,
uh they really struck a chord with the community and I think it just
shows the prolonged nature of this pandemic and the impact that it's having.
But we can't lose sight of the impact that each of
those deaths has uh not only on uh their families,
but really our entire community.
Thank you,
Riza, love to hear from you about what you're experiencing the tricities.
Yeah, very similar to, to elsewhere.
We have seen our hospitalization numbers uh come down
but still uh
you know, for a hospital our size.
So we run an average census anywhere around 2 4200 and 50 patients.
Uh We had seen back in September when we were getting really nervous
and we were quite gridlocked as many as 85 COVID positive patients.
So, you know, um a third of our census
um
with COVID, uh we're down into the thirties now most days.
So today we've got 30 COVID positives uh in the hospital. I'm very pleased to see that
having come down so much,
but it's still not as low as it was even uh this past spring before the,
the uh late summer surge started.
So hoping to see that
continue to come down
uh over the course of the pandemic. I, I can tell you for us we've had um a
little over 3200 hospitalizations here for COVID. So
uh with all the ups and downs,
that's what's come our way.
Um About 260 have passed away in our hospital. So that's
uh folks who are uh staff and team have, um,
unfortunately had to help say goodbye to
without families present for most of those,
or at least only virtually.
And that's been probably the biggest challenge we
continue to hear about from our staff is,
uh, the amount of, uh, emotional burden,
uh, that they're carrying on behalf of families and others who are unable to,
unfortunately have visitation at the level that we had pre panic.
Um,
you know, the numbers in the tricities here
in eastern Washington are still fairly high.
I haven't looked at the the latest, uh through the weekend but,
uh, very pleased though that the hospitalizations have at least come down.
But as you've heard from other facilities to some of
our ability to open up census tragically has been through
more deaths that have sped up more recently and have
been in younger and younger patients in the past,
um, in the past few months.
So, uh, pleased to see the numbers coming down,
but I still have a long way to go until we're out of the woods with this.
We have been able to take a little more by way of transfers of patients coming in.
Finally, we were quite gridlocked,
as I mentioned in September when we had our census in the eighties and
uh very low staffing with the number of our staff that
were out uh isolating due to COVID exposure or other things.
But that
uh situation is starting to open up a little bit, uh,
which is helpful and then looking into the
rest of the year hoping that, um,
Thanksgiving and Christmas New Year don't bring another surge and
that we continue going in the direction that we've been,
uh, as far as staffing and uh, vaccinations and all those we're doing pretty well.
We are well above 90% compliant,
either through vaccination or through appropriate exemptions at this point.
Uh, the vast majority um through being vaccinated. So
um
that looks very positive.
I would say the unfortunate thing that maybe is missing in that as
we look at that data is the number of folks that we've lost
prior to this. Uh folks that knew that there was
a,
a vaccine requirement coming and maybe chose to either leave health
care or go somewhere where they thought maybe the the mandates
would be a little different.
And of course,
we know what's happening in the future with some of the federal mandates.
So that may be harder to do. But
if you look at the number of staff that we've lost this year,
uh We lost nearly a quarter of our IC U staff uh through through this year
and we've replaced some of those positions and
we have some travelers we've been able to fill
but other key positions like that.
I I think as we focus on what's going to happen with the vaccine mandate, now,
I'm less worried about this than what's happened in the many months
preceding and the amount of turnover and vacancies we're now trying to fill
and everyone's in the same situation with the hospitals,
largely all competing with each other now across the country for a staff.
And you've heard about all the travel contracts and what not going on.
Um So that, that's about where we are,
but overall feeling optimistic that we're headed in the right direction,
we just like to keep heading there faster and uh
move through this.
And would you,
do you think that some of that departure of
IC U staff is what you were describing earlier,
the the
accumulated grief of having to um lose so many patients
and have them not have their families with them.
That's part of it. I think it's a variety of things.
It's uh certainly that's a part of it.
I think there's a few who have tried and now these very
lucrative travel assignments that folks that are mobile and flexible can take.
We've lost a few that have
looked to do those and some that have,
that have tried that and come back quite honestly.
Uh I think those are a little bit harder and more challenging.
Maybe, maybe sometimes some people understand and then
others who have left for other reasons,
maybe they were getting closer to retirement and
decided that this was a good time to,
to do something different and some who have stayed
in the hospital, but just wanted to move out of the IC U because of that.
And um, and the same is true with other, other departments too.
We've had turnover for a whole host of different reasons.
But the pandemic in one way, shape or form usually is, is part of that.
Thank you,
Doctor
Carter.
I guess that the view from Moses Lake.
Yeah. And I was listening to Doctor
Khalil and it's remarkable to me that although we're just a
50 bed hospital here in the middle of um central Washington,
our story is very similar to Doctor Khalil
down in Cadillac. So or maybe not surprising given that we're fairly close. So
um here in Moses Lake, uh we are also very happy that we kind of got out of September,
which was a very dark month for us.
Uh We had better ability to
um
transfer patients to larger facilities as Doctor Khalil
mentioned.
However, even in our smaller hospital here, um we,
our census is higher than it's ever been.
So our COVID patients thankfully have gone from the mid
twenties on a daily basis to the mid teens.
However, we still overcapacity on a daily basis with our hospital census,
we have very
sick patients, high acuity.
Um so even non COVID, our I 12 bed IC U is full on a daily basis. Our
26 bed med surgeon is full on a daily basis.
We're boarding patients um in the emergency department,
we've experienced very similar
um
staffing issues. Um prior to this last week, we'd only lost seven
employees that would specifically state it was because of the vaccine mandate.
Um However, we rely fairly heavily on staffing agencies where we're at.
We don't have a huge pool of, of staff otherwise.
Um And with the cost of those staffing agency contracts, that is, um,
it's hurting us a little bit.
Um And then this last week,
we lost almost our entire materials management department
um because specifically to the mandate,
um we've had a fairly large rise in um people who have decided to retire.
Um And then doctor like Doctor Khalil
said,
um a fairly large number of people that have chose
to travel or move to other states where they,
they may be believed that there was not gonna be a mandate in place.
Um Over the course of 2021 we've had 23 deaths from um
COVID, which does not seem like a lot.
But again,
imagine our census is much smaller than some
of these larger facilities we're talking to.
Um And September was um a month that was
um
harder for us, harder for our staff. We were losing um multiple patients a week.
Um And then just like Doctor
Khalil
said,
we had many staff out so staffing issues with those um
because of either exposure to COVID or positive COVID rates.
Um
So a very difficult month for us, we were happy to see October.
Although the anxiety that came with the um
impending October 18th date has also been very stressful for our staff
for vaccines. We also are in compliance with the mandate.
Um And again,
we've had a little bit of a a rush the last several um days and over the weekend,
um today,
everybody's uh running around fairly frantically making sure
everything is in order ready for midnight tonight.
Um But overall, our,
our meth message has always been educate and continue to encourage.
So um even our employees who are
in the process,
us with just one vaccine or um have chosen a an exemption of some sort
and been granted that we continue to
educate and encourage vaccines across the board.
Um And then our big hope for this week is um vaccines for the younger Children.
So we're looking forward to that.
Can you doctor Carter? Can you tell folks what materials management means?
-- You said you're sure.
-- So,
so it's basically our warehouse.
So the people making sure that we have the supplies that we need to keep functioning.
So,
uh when we were,
I mean, that's really the, the sum of it.
Um I think about the beginning of the, the,
the COVID pandemic when we were looking for masks and P pe and
um just keeping everybody supplied.
If we didn't have materials management,
I don't even know who would have done that job.
So,
um
it's hard to keep things stock when you don't
have people purchasing and delivering and stocking our shelves.
That, that is one of the things that we know is that even in hospitals that have a
high rate of vaccine among their clinical staff,
they may have some of those supportive staff, you know, folks in accounting or
um
uh supply chain that,
that could have a real impact on the functioning of the hospital.
So that's some of the things that the hospital leaders are sorting through
uh over the we'll be sorting through over the next week.
All right, Doctor mcdonald, um we just heard about the vaccines,
a little men of the vaccines for kids, um
which we're all really looking forward to.
Uh
-- Thanks
-- Cassie. Yes, we are very excited about
when the FDA will approve for emergency authorization
use of vaccine in our younger Children.
And
we are ready to um work with the pediatric community to get
um that vaccine out as soon as we hear the announcement.
So very excited about that
uh in terms of what's happening um
in the pediatric community at Seattle Children's.
Fortunately,
we've not seen the large numbers of COVID positive patients
in in our hospital compared to our adult colleagues.
So uh approximately anywhere from 3 to 15 patients have
been admitted at one time with COVID uh positive um
testing.
And uh in August, we saw more of those in the adolescence.
Uh and but in September,
we've seen younger Children um admitted with COVID disease.
So
very concerning
our workforce right now is approximately 98% fully vaccinated.
And that's across um our whole uh workforce. Um
not just the clinical workforce
and uh approximately 1%
are, have been,
um at least partially vaccinated and we're waiting
for that time when they're fully vaccinated.
And the final 1% are those that uh submitted exemptions
and we're working hard to uh try to accommodate
as much of as many of those as possible.
We have not wanted to lose any of our workforce. So,
but unfortunately, as uh Doctor Dalet
mentioned, um some will need to go on uh administrative leave,
but we're really trying to work with every individual
as much as possible to see what we can do to keep them with us.
Thank you. Is there any update Doctor mcdowell to the timeline for kids, the 5 to 11
or what's, what's your, what if you had to guess? What's your best guess?
-- I,
-- I am really hoping
November
uh early November would be um
it would be fantastic if it would be before the end of this month,
but uh we're ready to go when it happens.
Um So let's just hope that the FDA approves it as soon as possible.
And I know the federal government is working on allowing um pre
orders of the vaccine in anticipation of in, in hopes of its approval.
Um Exactly
great.
And I,
I wanna also highlight something Doctor mcdonald said which is that many
hospitals rather than terminating staff are putting them on leave if they're,
if they're not compliant with the vaccine
mandate, um,
in hopes that they will change and get vaccinated because it's
a lot easier to bring someone back from leave than,
um,
having to go if they've been terminated to go through the rehire process.
So that's, I don't know that every hi, are all of you doing that or some of,
is it kind of a mixture
we're doing that?
You know, we're putting, uh, individuals who have started the process.
Uh, so if they've started their vaccine, but won't be fully vaccinated,
uh, say they got one dose, uh, this last week or two, then they could go on, uh,
administrative leave, uh, until they are compliant.
Similarly, those who, uh,
received a denial of an exemption request have
essentially 45 days to come into compliance.
And so they could also be on leave during that period of time.
Right. And there's some folks who have a time, limited medical exemption as well.
For example, if they've had COVID and got monoclonal antibodies,
you can't be vaccinated until that until the 90 days post.
And so they may be on
a, a medical exemption, but it has an expiration date.
All right. We are, um, happy to take questions.
I don't see any in the chat um, yet,
but please put some in the chat or go ahead and speak up if you've got questions,
I apologize.
This is Jessa mcintyre with box 13 in Seattle and I,
I missed the opening comments there.
That is a user error. Um
So I,
-- I
-- just wanted to revisit this is probably already discussed. Um,
but um
where the hospitalized, I know that the data probably won't come in for a few weeks.
-- But where is your confidence in your ability to
-- retain most of your
staff?
Um Everyone can answer this, uh, directly.
What we estimate statewide is that we will lose between two and 5% of hospital staff.
That actually may be honestly a high estimate from what we heard over the weekend.
Um,
because we heard that there were people who, uh,
moved to getting starting their vaccination series and,
and then surpri surprisingly, I mean, I think this is like great news,
but also probably makes the hr people tear their hair out.
There's a number of people who are,
were fully vaccinated and they were fully vaccinated, you know,
months and months ago,
it just hadn't gotten around to turning in their
cards and they turned in their cards on,
you know, Thursday, Friday, Saturday.
So there's some, uh, that, that's, uh, I mean,
that's the greatest thing to find out that people actually are vaccinated.
But
that's, they, they probably were put,
they were put in the estimate estimate of unvaccinated, but they were vaccinated.
So other folks wanna share your confidence kind of how you're feeling about that.
Ok.
We're pretty confident that, um, at this point, our numbers are pretty stable.
We don't think we're going to lose anybody tomorrow.
Yeah, as I mentioned, uh, earlier, um,
you know, I, I think we'll lose less than 1%.
Uh, unfortunately,
right now there are about 220 of our staff who are not in compliance.
Uh, and so, unless something changes, such as they start their vaccination today,
uh they will be separated from us tomorrow.
We have a fairly small number that that's at risk just to repeat that again.
And my,
my bigger concern that I mentioned earlier in
the opening comments was more along the lines of
the number of staff that we've already lost a year to date for
various reasons and uh kind of where that puts us going forward.
But the, the change as of today going in tomorrow,
we don't think is gonna incrementally add a large number to that.
And we expect that we will have some that go on administrative leave,
-- but we're really working hard to um really minimize that um across our
-- workforce.
When you look at the reports out of New York and California,
there are a lot of folks who move from
not, I mean, I mean, not there's still people who lost their, lost their jobs.
There are also a substantial number of people who move from
leave to starting the vaccine process.
Um So we're hopeful that will be the case as well.
Um
Is a question about uh
so Kate, let me know if that answered your question about uh how,
how many your question was,
do any of the hospital leaders on the call and know how many,
if any people will be dismissed tomorrow?
Um Doctor Carter, do you have any specific numbers of how many folks you think will,
will leave?
I guess you're, you're putting folks on leave, right? So you're not.
-- So,
-- so um
I would say the same thing Doctor
Khalil
said we've had a fair amount of loss over the course of
the year because of um early retirements or choosing to move away.
But um the difference between today and tomorrow really, um
I, we don't anticipate a big number between today and tomorrow.
Great. Thank you.
Um Are rural hospitals still going to be hardest impacted by the vaccine mandate?
Yes.
Um rural eastern Washington,
especially rural Western Washington is actually in better shape.
Um Not that's not a fully across the board, but, you know, communities like
Port Townsend, um they've got a higher vaccination rate than um
than some of the eastern Washington communities,
you know,
go ahead.
Ok.
I
was just gonna add, you know, I think even though we look at some of the,
the smaller hospitals,
rural hospitals that may potentially be
individually harder uh impacted ultimately though
uh our state is so interconnected with respect to the healthcare system,
uh that any loss impacts all of us.
Because if we have a reduction in services in one area or reduction in beds
in an area, it impacts all of us as we've seen,
given the overall capacity constraints.
And so
that's one of the things that we're really looking at as well.
And we have to think about how is this across
the state and almost thinking of us as one system.
Uh when we look at the impact of this mandate
uh here uh going forward because as others have said,
we're all stretched uh from a staffing uh standpoint.
And so any impact anywhere within our state is gonna
have at least a ripple effect across the state.
Thank you.
Um
ok.
Uh What are the contingency plans for hiring
more workers to replace those who are leaving,
especially the rural hospitals that are losing a greater percentage?
Um I'll make some comments and invite others to come in as well.
Everybody's looking for staff.
So whether it's trying to hire new staff or traveler contracts or
um there's another question about the federal resources coming into hospitals.
There is potentially there,
there should be some staff resources that are available to hospitals.
Um
Everyone is looking and trying to fill those, those places.
We will see a, a curtailing of services. There's no question about that.
Um People are going to cap it as Doctor Della just described,
there's gonna be caps on admissions in some rural hospitals there's
going to be um closing down of some service lines potentially or
um
having people have to wait longer for elective
or non urgent procedures or for outpatient services.
So there that it's both a goal to hire more staff,
but also to figure out how do you reconfigure services in a
way that you can cover it with the staff that you've got.
Anybody else wanna comment on that things that strategies you're
using to cover for the staff that have gone.
Unfortunately, Moses Lake just like other places.
Um We've had to reduce our services in our or
um and some of that is hospital bed availability. Some of that is staffing.
We have to use those valuable nurses and other places
in the hospital to take care of acutely ill people.
Um We,
we earlier in the year did set up in the clinic
at least um ma apprenticeships to help build our MA program.
We have a, a nursing school of nursing school and an ma school here in town.
Thankfully. So we have nurse tech programs in the er to help build that supply.
Um
Our CNO has developed a, a buddy program if you will.
So if we can borrow from the clinic and bring him into
the hospital um and have them tasking with other licensed nurses.
We had kind of gone away from using LP NS um
and using MA S in our clinic and our hospital.
But we now are um looking at L LP NS as um source resources for us.
Um But unfortunately, I think you're right, Cassie.
There comes a point where we just have to cap what we can
do here at the hospital if we don't have the staffing to,
to accommodate that.
Thank you.
Um
Whitney Ward sent a question saying explain more about
how the reduction in services will impact Samaritan.
But I think that question
might have been coming in as Doctor Carter was speaking.
So if you need more information, will you put that back in the chat?
I, I think that she answered that Doctor Carter,
anything else you would say about that?
I think I answered it unless
I think, I think it was kind of a simultaneous, you know,
you were speaking as the question was coming in.
I believe
um
Doctor Dett
put in the chat that the um FD advisory committee
is meeting October 26th to review the data for Children.
5 to 11 years old.
I've been telling my 10 year old that this is going to be the
best Halloween treat ever that he could
potentially get vaccinated at Halloween week.
He's very excited.
Um
Let's see, update on federal resources coming into hospitals. So,
um
Taa
Riley, would you be willing to take this question?
I think you're closer to what's happening with the AC I contract
if you're still on, stay still on? Yep,
I'm here.
I honestly, I'm not sure if I've got a whole lot more than you do.
I know that um the hospitals are able to um apply right now and that Dey
has got a,
the Department of State Department of Health has a
system that has been set up for that.
Um
And the other good news is that the state has secured um
funding for COVID only um hospital care
that is provided um through
the agency staff from FEMA.
So that's the other uh piece of good news about that contract.
I don't know, Cassie, if that, I've got a whole lot more to share than that.
I I know that a number quite a few hospitals have applied to the state for the staff.
The tricky piece as Taa just described is that
in order to receive federal funding for the staff,
they have to be
doing only COVID care
and so to have.
So the hospitals are trying to think about how
can they manage having a staff person who comes,
who, you know, is working in the IC U and is like,
can't touch someone who's there because they had a heart attack.
They have, you know, they can only focus on the COVID patients.
I think it's possible but it does make it um
less helpful to a rural hospital that might have, you know, only one COVID patient.
Um for example, um but any have any of you applied for the
uh
to be a site for the staff to go to the federal staff.
No. OK.
All right.
Um
So another question given the impacts we mentioned
with some staff loss and curtailing of services.
What do we say to people who argue that vaccine mandate
should have given more wiggle room to avoid impacts to services?
I will say this has been
an incredibly thorny question. Um Among the hospital leadership in the state,
two really important goals that we are facing here.
One is we want as many staff as possible to be vaccinated. It protects the staff,
it protects their patients.
And if you get an outbreak in a hospital, you the in this, you know,
you could end up quarantining a ton of staff, um impacting a ton of patients.
And so you could actually cripple yourself more significantly.
But the other goal is to keep the health sys system functioning as much
as possible and to be able to serve as many people as possible.
And those goals
sometimes work together and sometimes they're in conflict. And so
um
we have maintained,
we have not requested changes to the vaccine mandate as an association.
We do have some members who would like to see changes, but it is not
um that's not been a consensus position among our membership.
Um We've really been focusing on trying to help our hospitals as much as possible.
Um implement the mandate. Uh
do provide accommodations to those who receive exemptions,
uh do good education of their
staff. But it is, it's a,
uh it's a really tricky question.
Um Anybody wanna comment on it,
you know, there's a lot of variables. I guess the one thing I, I would say is
prior to this, uh being mandated, we were,
we were kind of capped out at a certain level of, of vaccination while it was
voluntary. Uh with all the things we were doing to try to get it
higher, it was just not moving
and having the uh the mandate has really moved
up our vaccine compliance as you've heard today.
Uh quite, quite a bit. So, I guess the question becomes, um,
what's, what's the upside? What's the downside? I, I,
yes, there are some, uh in our case, a small number of probably of folks, we may
lose due to the, due to the mandate.
But if we have a,
a requisite number of folks that are kept
safe and can stay in staffing because they're not
at home isolating because they're avoiding getting sick and
those kinds of things from a staffing perspective.
Um
Hopefully that will balance out and be a net positive for us.
And then,
uh just from the standpoint of believing that our workforce in
health care in order to protect the patients that we're serving
uh in here as well as themselves, should get vaccinated.
Uh It,
it certainly lines up with our organization's beliefs and where we're headed.
So we'll, we'll see how the numbers play out. But I'm hopeful that
the number of additional,
that we've uh managed to get vaccinated because of the mandate will help
keep everybody safe and keep staffing actually stronger in the long run.
You know, I agree. I think um there is a tension there as Cassie uh mentioned.
At the same time, we know these vaccines are safe and effective.
If you look in King County,
uh if you are unvaccinated,
you have a ninefold greater likelihood of getting infected,
a 50 fold,
greater likelihood of being hospitalized and over a
60 fold likelihood of dying from COVID-19.
And as Cassie mentioned, we continue to have 15 to 20 deaths across the state uh
each day
or I mean, each week. So this is something that we need
to address.
We feel very strongly that we have an obligation to create a safe environment
for our patients, for our staff.
We care for a lot of immunocompromised patients who often can't mount
uh an immune responsive the vaccine themselves.
We've seen outbreaks among our healthcare workers.
Now, many of those are from acquisition within the community,
but if they're infected there and then come back in
uh there is that risk of transmission to coworkers uh and patients.
And so we believe that we do need to keep a safe environment.
And when you look at the exemption request that we received,
we received a little over 400
we approved about a third.
But what was interesting is that of those who had their exemption
request denied the majority went on to start the vaccination series.
And so overall,
we have seen this increase in vaccination rates through this mandate.
Uh And again,
we recognize the challenges and that tension particularly with staffing.
Uh But we really feel that this as uh Risa just said,
it's in alignment with our values and our
obligation as healthcare workers and healthcare organizations.
Uh I just wanna echo what uh what Tim said in, in our, in our hospital,
very, very vulnerable pediatric population, most of which are not vaccinated
and really excited to see,
hopefully by the end of the month that the 5 to
11 year olds will be able to start their vaccine.
But of all of those that are patients,
many of them are immune compromised and we really
feel strongly that we have to protect our patients,
our families um and our workforce um from contracting COVID um
disease.
So it's really critical and I also wanna put in a uh
mention that people should also get their flu vaccine this year.
I'm really concerned that as more and more um people are out
in the public that we will see a surge um of flu
um coming in the coming months
and uh just really um just wanna double down on
the nece the necessity of getting that vaccine as well.
Any other comments about that?
Um
You know, I actually wanted to co
doctor uh uh
mcdonald.
When you were talking,
it reminded me of something you said earlier that we haven't seen
the as high a pediatric cases as some other states have seen.
And we wanna give,
I wanna give huge gratitude to our governor for having uh the rule
about you got to wear masks in schools and sticking to it.
We find absolutely baffling other governors saying that you not only
like, like actively discouraging them wearing masks in schools. Um
It is so nice to have kids go to school and feel like um there's a lot of, there's,
there are barriers of protection for them.
Um
So huge kudos to Governor Insley for that.
Um ok, another question with staffing shortages, driving up wages and incentives
for positions like travel nurses.
It sounds like you're losing some folks to those higher paying travel positions.
How do you create a long term solution to that?
Um One thing that we are involved in um in partnership with the
American Hospital Association is asking the Federal
Attorney General to look at the sta
travel staffing contracts because the prices are
just remarkably high and also how much of that money is going
directly to the workers versus um to the agencies. So
it really is a national issue. It's happening all around the country.
But other other thoughts about how to create a
um
long term solutions to that for folks who are
taking the higher paying travel positions and maybe,
um, Risa,
you might comment on people coming back from travel
contracts because I've heard that as well that like
you go to a city, you don't know anybody. You're in
a,
you know,
you're in some kind of like
temporary housing and you don't know the team and you don't know the hospital,
you don't know how it works and
it's, uh, we have heard for sure that some folks who have tried it,
it turns out they don't really like it.
Yeah, I think that's a tough gig for, for all the reasons you mentioned, Cassie and,
and for us.
Uh and, and probably somewhere, I'm sure my colleagues on the call here today
continuing to focus on all the things.
We've always tried to focus on having a,
having a great culture and having a um a place that people want to work and, you know,
keeping our
people that have been here for many years,
uh dedicated support in whatever ways we can knowing that it's been a challenge.
I think people are frustrated on a whole lot of different levels.
Uh probably at any organization they work with
these days, but
trying to really focus on
caring for and retaining the people that we have here is
uh really been our major focus and these travel uh positions.
I know that the prices go up and down depending on the situation that that's going on.
And, you know, as the,
as the curve, the epidemiological curve starts to come down
and things change. I expect that the um
the wages on those travel positions will start to come,
come down as well and be hopefully a little bit less um
tempting for folks. But there's no, no magic bullet to this.
I think just trying to create
as good of an environment as possible for folks in healthcare in general.
So that we have more people wanting to come into the workforce and be part of this.
And it's still an amazing thing to be
part of and that people are intrinsically motivated
on so many levels to to be part of um hospitals and other healthcare organizations.
So
I think it's all those things.
And again, we,
we have a lot going on right now with people competing with sign on bonuses and
all sorts of stuff all over the country trying to pull a staff here and there.
But at some level,
I'm sure folks like to be able to stay where they
are and grow with a team that they are part of and
we will all continue focusing on those things as well. So
I don't think there's any silver bullet answer to this other than continue
to focus on all the things that we know are the right things.
I think Risa
uh
made a really good point earlier on uh
that I think that the overall staffing challenges,
yes, there will be some impact from the mandate, but that's not the primary impact.
The primary impact is the last 21 months
of going through this pandemic and the exhaustion
and fatigue uh that our staff are feeling.
Um We've also from the mandate standpoint,
had many staff who are actually pleased that we
are creating an environment that is safe for them.
They want to work with individuals who are vaccinated
and our patients are asking
uh about the vaccination status of those caring for them.
Uh So I think many people are actually very glad that
we are requiring uh vaccination uh within our facilities as well.
The bigger issue like Reza said is just how do we
really support our people, the resilience and as we even come out of this pandemic,
uh that's got to be our primary focus uh across all
of our organizations is how would we best support our people?
Ok, Risa, a question for you. Do you anticipate an increased census
uh
due to cutbacks at rural hospitals after the vaccine mandate.
Do you think you're going to be receiving more patients out of rural hospitals?
I think maybe and again, it comes down to the,
to the numbers when we were back in September and we saw the
disease curve going this way.
And so our staffing curve going going the other way that obviously,
it was not a great combination for, for anybody,
but as we see the curve start to flatten and come down, uh at the same time, as,
as I know, we are seeing some of these staffing challenges in rural hospitals.
It just depends on the degree to which those curves move in tandem. And
my hope is that the uh disease incidence continues to
come down even as some of those staffing challenges occur.
That's certainly what we're, we're seeing here. Our staffing hasn't gotten um,
that much better,
but it has gotten a little bit better as we've seen the the disease incidents
uh come down and we are able now to accept more of those transfers in.
So I hope a combination of
uh us being able to accept more if there is a need for it.
And then in those rural communities,
um their disease incidents starting to come down
even as some of their staffing is challenged,
um hopefully we will keep us pretty stable, but we'll see, we,
we need to be prepared if it does surge back up again.
And, and we certainly will
thank you.
Um
are hospitals considering requiring an additional or booster
dose for staff members in the future?
And then maybe a correlator that I'll ask this question is,
how many staff are you seeing voluntarily seeking out the booster,
the booster dose?
Are you tracking that?
And just to remind folks, it's only for pfizer.
So like I have, I have got the Moderna shot,
so I'm not currently eligible for a booster and um
so that it's a, it's a subset of people who um
who can get a booster right now.
We have no plans to require it currently,
but we have seen a number of staff that are taking advantage of that that can and I,
I don't have any numbers to share, but I certainly encouraging those that can
to do that. But no, no plans to require it currently.
We've done.
Ok.
Go ahead.
We've had uh a pretty significant number of our staff
that um were eligible to get the Pfizer booster.
Go ahead and, and get it. So our vaccine clinic has been relatively
um full
and um
we are not requiring it though.
Uh It's still under an eu a and at some point in the future,
um we very well may be requiring it
di it. How about you? Anything different?
Uh No, I don't have uh numbers. And again, it's only those who got Pfizer um
in terms of the booster and we haven't had conversations.
I, I think we need to wait and see where things uh go.
Um Could it be that there's uh an annual need uh
for a Coronavirus vaccine just like there is with influenza potentially?
I I think we're just not there yet in terms
of us seeing the data got and what the recommendations from
us that we see will be in the future.
Doctor Carter, anything you wanna add.
Uh We're currently not requiring it,
but we have a fair amount of our um people who
flies are eligible that have been in line to get it
and it sounds like there may be some more um booster possibilities,
especially for Johnson and Johnson recipients in the next
couple of weeks. Doctor Dett,
any update you have about that.
Well, the FDA uh advisory panel met last week.
And so I think both with Moderna and Johnson and Johnson,
I think they are coming out with recommendations
uh for booster now goes through uh the
advisory committee on immunization practices from the CDC.
And then ultimately, the CDC director, uh
as we saw with Pfizer,
uh the CDC director um uh had a
different recommendation than uh the advisory committee.
So
I think by the end of this week,
we'll have a better sense uh in terms of potential boosters,
uh both for Moderna and Johnson and Johnson
and Johnson and Johnson, I'll just say, I don't know where this will end.
Um But you know,
there's also a discussion of uh should that booster be with a second dose of
Johnson and Johnson or should that second dose be with an MRN A vaccine?
Uh There's an NIH study that suggests that there may be a better
immune response with an MRN A vaccine.
Uh countries in Europe have experience with that,
particularly with the astrazeneca, which is analogous to the Johnson and Johnson.
So
um I'm not sure where that's all gonna shake out uh yet.
Uh And so hopefully by the end of this week, we'll have some more clarity,
but I would anticipate
uh that both of those uh groups will be eligible for boosters.
It's just not entirely clear what the Johnson and Johnson,
will it only be for the Johnson and Johnson or will
they allow an MRN a uh vaccine as the booster?
Thank you.
And um also I wanted to share some other information I was thinking about,
about the pediatric vaccine,
which is that it's going to be packaged differently than the, the pediatric Pfizer.
It's gonna be packaged differently
and it's a different strength. It's a third of the strength of the adult strength. Um
So it's, it's uh
you have to go to a place that has the pediatric
vaccine in order to get your 5 to 11 vaccinated.
So I assume Doctor mcdowell that Children will be
stocking in quite a bit of this vaccine.
Um Absolutely. And we will also be um having it at Odessa Brown
uh children's uh clinic um as well.
And so we will also wanna do our best to reach out to
the bio community f and that families and get those Children in.
So
we expect that we'll be really active in promoting a vaccination and
working with the university um as well.
Um They've been really fantastic partners um uh
for us in um vaccinating our community.
So, thank you.
I know lots of schools are working on this as well.
I've gotten this information from my kids schools but they're,
they're thinking about their vaccine clinic.
All right. That's all of our questions. Um,
uh, we are, one thing we didn't talk about was the federal vaccine mandate,
which we still don't have a date for.
Um, we were, we're expecting to receive the interim final rule.
Um, I don't believe that's come out.
Has anybody seen no one's seen a federal, the federal
rule?
I've been tracking as much honestly because the state rule we
think is at least as strong as the federal one.
Probably strong. It has not come out.
Um
So,
and then that would probably be effective, you know, required
60 days or something after it come, the rule comes out.
So that's, that will uh have an impact across the country, but it,
we don't believe it will affect our uh vaccine
requirement at all because we think ours is,
uh as I said, at least as strong, if not stronger than the federal one.
All right. Thanks so much for joining us.
We will plan, we're not planning to have a briefing next week, but we plan to have one
on the first of November. And so we'll um hope that
nothing happens between now and then that would require us to um to do
this because usually it means some tragedy
is taking place or cases are skyrocketing.
Um
uh I hope that folks have a safe Halloween and, you know,
still the mother trick or treating, get out and do the trick or treating,
but wear your mask and be careful.
Um
And we'll see you again in a couple of weeks. Thanks a lot.
Thanks to our panelists so much for joining us. Really appreciate your time
and let's hope on November 1st that we'll have great news
about Children 5 to 11 being able to be vaccinated.
Yes.
Thank you.